# Arrays in C
Along with the parenthesis the `[]` for index calculation is at the highest precedence in C.

## Creating an Array
The array is an standard datatype nothing to import.

```c
#define SIZE 5
//prepressor replaces all vars with their value
//it will put 5 where ever it sees `SIZE`
int main(void){
	int n[SIZE]; //5 elements of int
	
	for(size_t i = 0; i < 5; ++i){
		n[i] = 0; 
		//set each element to 0 since they arent always 0
	}
}
```

We can also use an Initializer list:
```c
int L[5] = {1, 4, 9, 16, 25};
int M[7] = {0}; //{0,0,0,0,0,0,0}
```
`size_t` is just `unsigned int` it makes code easier to write. It is a `typedef`. 

In array `L`, if we know that $1$ is in `byte` location 32, then $4$ is in `byte` location 36, since integers are 4 bytes long.

## Char Arrays $\to$ Strings
The size of a `char` is **1** byte. 

An array if `char`s is a `string`. This array **must** be terminated by `null` character **`\0`**. We would not print out the `\0`. 

When we calculate the size of a `string`, we *don't* include the `\0`. Size as in `memory` size.

```c
char string1[20]; //reserves 20 chars
char string2[] = "string literal"; //reserves 15 chars
//we need 15 chars because we need to append the '\0'
```

Now to fill `string1` we can use
```c
scanf("%19s", string1);
```
We read up to 19 chars so we can full up the 20th element with `\0`. 

Important: `scanf` will scan till it encounters a whitespace. So a user input of `hello world` will only store the part before the space: `"hello"`.
 
Notice how we do not put `&string1`. This because an array is a compile-time data-type. Its length is known when compiling. Moreover, an array stores the pointer to its first memory box regardless. 

Here is a sample loop for an array
```c
#define SIZE ... //some number
int main(void){
	for(size_t i = 0; i < SIZE && string[i] != '\0'; i++){
		//code ...
	}
}

```

**Important Distinction**
Strings declared like this: (with an initialization value)
```c
char* alpha = "alpha";
```
**are not** mutable. They point to a segment that is read-only. To make arrays mutable they must be created from the heap (see [[2.12.1 Memory Allocation]]).

This **will** be mutable:
```c
char alpha[6] = "alpha";
```
## `static` arrays
Recall `static` from [[2.5 Functions]] and how its not part of the standard stack memory.

When declaring `static` arrays, they do not need to be set to default data, they are preset by the compiler with the default value.
```c
void func(void){
	static int array1[3];
	//defaultly init to {0, 0, 0}
}
```

The behavior of `static` arrays is the same as `static` variables. The memory persists until the file stop running. 

## Array Memory Address
```c
int main(){
	char array[5];
	printf("array = %p", array);
	printf("&array[0] = %p", &array[0]);
	printf("&array = %p", &array);
}
```

`%p` - format specifier for printing hexadecimal memory locations.  

All three will output the same pointer locations. All this to say that an array's name is the location of its first element. 

## 'Pass by Value'
A `struct` in C is passed by address and not by value. This is the same for an array, it is not passed by value but by address. We can alter an array passed in like:
```c
void modifyArray(int b[], size_t size);
```
However, if we are not given the array and we are only passed in a var like:

```c
//imagine this does something to the num 
void modifyElement(int c); 
int a = {0, 1, 2}; 
modifyElement(a[1]);
```
This will do nothing since primitives are passed in by **value** and not address. 

If we do not want a function to alter the array we can declare the header as:
```c
void modifyFail(const int b[]){
	b[0] += 99; //fails
}
```

## Multi-dimensional Array
### Declaration
```c
int array1[2][3] = {{1, 2, 3}, {4, 5, 6}};
int array2[2][3] = {1, 2, 3, 4, 5};
int array3[2][3] = {{1,2}, {4}};
```

For array 2 the compiler takes care of our `2D` array. It counts by 3s and makes it into a `2D` array.
$$
\begin{align*}
\text{array2}&: \{\{1,2,3\}, \{4,5,0\}\} \\
\text{array3}&: \{\{1,2,0\}, \{4,0,0\}\}
\end{align*}
$$

## Putting `2D` arrays as func args
```c
void printArray(int a[][3]);
```

We need to specify how many cols there are. In other words we need to specify how many elements are in each array in the `2D` array. 

### Why?
Lovely Answer from [Stackoverflow](https://stackoverflow.com/a/3910533/12751409)

```c
A. int arr[ 4 ][ 7 ]; arr[2][3] = arr + 2 * 7 + 3 = arr + 17
B. int arr[ 4 ][ 5 ]; arr[2][3] = arr + 2 * 5 + 3 = arr + 13
C. int arr[ 6 ][ 7 ]; arr[2][3] = arr + 2 * 7 + 3 = arr + 17
```
Notice that for A and B the pointer output for `arr[2][3]` is not the same. This is because we depend on how long a `row` is to find an Array address. Thus, the `cols` is required to **properly** find the memory address. 

## Size defining functions prototypes
```c
void print1DArray(size_t size, int array[size]);
void print1DArray(size_t row, size_t col, int array[row][col]);
```
We declare size first so the compiler knows how long the array is
## `sizeof` operator
It is built in. We can use `sizeof` to see how big an array is in **`bytes`**.
Ex:
```c
unsigned int arraySize = 6;
int array[arraySize];

printf("%d", sizeof(array)); 
//outputs 24 which is 4 (int size) * 6*
```


## Class Ext
The `Array` is an example of **Compile Time** memory allocation. 