# Memory Management
## 4 main Regions of Memory
They are
+ `BSS/DATA`
+ `data`
+ `stack`
+ `heap`

> **Note**:  When we reference main memory we mean *ram* while other locations are *secondary*

These 4 main regions are on the **RAM**

### `BSS/DATA`
This is for `static` variables. This can also be global variable. Uninitialized variables are in the `bss` and set to `0`. The `static` values are stored in the `DATA` section.

### `stack`
This area of the memory is for functional scopes (data local to a function). Each time a function is called a `stack frame` is created to store these variables. When the function terminated the frame is popped and space is freed, the memory is only *valid* over the life time of the function. Notice that each stack has a **limit**. Storing too much data on one stack can cause the stack to *overflow*. Prior to C99, the size of local memory had to be known at runtime for the compiler to allocate proper space to the stack. This is why arrays are compile-time allocation. 

### `heap`
The `heap` is a large region in memory to store large blocks of data. This is where the requested memory comes from (dynamic allocation). 
> **Note**: Any requested memory must be freed after use. 

## Example of Memory Leakage
```c
#include <stdio.h>
#include <string.h>
#include <stdlib.h>

struct leak{
    int x;
    char *str;
};


int main(){
    struct leak *memLeak = malloc(sizeof(struct leak));
    memLeak->x = 5;
    memLeak->str = malloc(6 * sizeof(char));

    strcpy(memLeak->str, "Hello");

    printf("x:%d\nstr:%s", memLeak->x, memLeak->str);
    
    //x:5
    //str: hello

    free(memLeak);
    memLeak = NULL;
}
```
The issue is that we did not free the `str`. 
The lesson here is that we free the most nested elements first and then the over arching elements. 

## Free Example
```c
void main(){
	int x = 3;
	free(&x); //& since free accepts pointer arg
}
```
This code is invalid since `x` lives on the stack. `free` cannot *free* stack variables, they deal with memory on the heap. 