# Tricky Pointer Examples
A good method of seeing what is really going on is to read right to left. 

<!--
Steps:
1. Find the identifier
2. Identify the uses of `[]`, `()` - function or `*`
3. -
-->
## Example A
```c
int* p[];
```
### Steps to understanding
1. `p` is an array (we are moving right)
2. Now that we cant move right we move left. `p` is an array of pointers of type `int`. 

## Example B
```c
int *(*func())();
```
### Steps to understanding
1. The *identifier* is `func`. "`func` is" 
2. Notice to the right we have `()` signifying a functional call. "`func` is a function returning a pointer to"
3. Then we go right again. Notice we see a `()`. This means a function is being called. 

So far we know that `func` is returning a pointer to a function which returns a pointer to an integer signified by the `int *`; 

## Example *C*
```c
int (*(*fun_one)(char *, double))[9][20];
```
1. Identifier: `fun_one`
2. Then  we see that `fun_one` is a pointer to something.
3. Next, we see that `fun_one` is a pointer to a function that accepts arguments of `char *`, and `double`. 
4. It is returning a pointer. 
5. It is returning a integer 2D array. 

To make this easier we can also analyze.
```c
int (*(*fun_one)())[][];
```

## Illegal Combos
1. `[]()` - cannot have an array of functions (pointer to functions only)
2. `()()` - function that returns a function
3. `()[]` - we cannot return arrays we can only return array pointers

## *More* Examples and Answers:
```c
int *v[3];
int *(v[3]);
int (*v)[3];
```
> v is an array of length 3 holding pointers

```c
int *v();
```
> v is a function, the function returns a *pointer* to an integer

```c
void (*v)(int);
```
> v is a pointer to a function that expects *one* integer and returns *nothing*.  

```c
int (*v)(void);
```
> v is a pointer to a function that takes 0 args and returns an integer. 

```c
int (*v[])();
```
> v is an array of pointers to functions where the functional return type is int. 

```c
int*(*v[10])()
```
> v is of an array of size 10 where each element of the array is a pointer to a function where the return type is a pointer to an integer. 

```c
int (*(*f())[13])()
```
> f is a function returning a pointer to an array of 13 pointers to functions which return int.