# 8.2 - Processes

> Most of this is covered in the OSTEP or Lecture notes.

Process - *running* program

The OS gives us an illusion that our program has exclusive access to the processor. Moreover it also gives the illusion that it has control over the entire stick of memory the system has. 

## Logical Control Flow
Logical Control Flow - series of PC values that correspond to the current process's code. 

A system with $n$ concurrent processes has $n$ logical flows. Each process thinks it is the only one on the processor WRT to PC values.

## Concurrent Flow
A logical flow who's time overlaps in time with another flow is called a concurrent flow. 

*concurrency* - flows at the same time
*multitasking* - taking turns on the processor
*parallel flows* - flows at the same time but on different processors

## Private Address Space
A $n$ bit machine has $2^n$ possible addresses. A process provides each program its own **private** address space.  

## User/Kernel Mode
In order to provide a process abstraction, the OS restricts certain instructions for applications as well as the accessible aforementioned address space. 

Processors provide the distinction between modes via a **mode bit**. 
- unset -> user mode
- set bit -> kernel mode

This means that a process **must** rely on the OS to make sensitive operations like IO or accessing external devices. It is also not allowed to access the memory of processes (including the OS), doing so triggers the protection fault ([[8.1 - Exceptions]]). If a user program wants to commit a sensitive it will make a syscall which will initiate a trap instruction. The mode bit will change the handler will commit the operation (if possible). Once the action is completed the mode bit is unset returning to user mode. 

## Context Switching
Operating system kernel implements multitasking via a exceptional control flow known as a `context-switch`. The context-switch is built upon a low level exception *mechanism*. 

The kernel maintains a context for each process, the context is what the kernel needs to restart the process if paused. 
+ General Purpose Registers
+ PC, SP

Other kernel data structures keep track of opened files by a process and its addressable memory space (private address space). 

The decision to pause a active process and start another one is know as **scheduling**. This is a complex part of the kernel. Once a process is decided to replace the current one it needs to be *switched* on. 

A context switch will occur:
1. the current process's context will be saved
2. the new process's context will be restored
3. new process gets control

Here are some examples of context-switches
- `read()`
	- if we are waiting to read data from a disk the OS might switch on another process while waiting for a disk interrupt
	- this is because the disk *may* take a long time to return data
 - `sleep()`
	- self explanatory
- timer timeout
	- if a process has been running for too long it will be switched out.
	- all systems have a periodic time (1ms or 10ms)


