# 1.2 Lecture Supplement on 08/30/22
Consider the sum:
$$
9.4 - 9 - 0.4
$$

While we expect this to be $0$, it is not the case on machines. 
A machine will store the numbers in the following fashion:
$$
\begin{align}
	9.4 &\to 9.4 + \delta \\
	9   &\to 9 \\
	0.4 &\to 0.4 + \epsilon
\end{align}
$$

Where $\delta, \epsilon$ are parts of the error generated when the decimal numbers are stored. 

When we compute this sum we notice that:
$$
9.4 - 9 - 0.4 = \delta - \epsilon
$$
There is some degree of error here. 

## Error Example
| $p$                      | $p^*$                    | Actual Error         | Absolute Error       | Relative Error               |
| ------------------------ | ------------------------ | -------------------- | -------------------- | ---------------------------- |
| $0.30000 \times 10^1$    | $0.31000 \times 10^1$    | $-0.01\times10^{1}$  | $0.1$                | $\frac{1}{3} \times 10^{-1}$ |
| $0.30000 \times 10^{-3}$ | $0.31000 \times 10^{-3}$ | $-0.01\times10^{-3}$ | $0.1 \times 10^{-4}$ | $\frac{1}{3} \times 10^{-1}$ |
| $0.30000 \times 10^4$    | $0.31000 \times 10^4$    | $-0.01\times10^{4}$  | $0.1 \times 10^{3}$  | $\frac{1}{3} \times 10^{-1}$ | 

> It may be the case, for numbers like $\pi$, that there exists no concrete value to calculate error from. Here we use a reference number and treat **it** like it is like concrete value. 

## Finite Digit Arithmetic

**Perform** $x \oplus y$ where $x = \frac{1}{3}$ and $y = \frac{5}{7}$ where the machine only has 5 digits of precision. 

First we normalize. (This example uses **rounding** and NOT chopping)
$$
\begin{align}
	x &\to 0.333333\cdots \times 10^0 \\
	y &\to 0.714285\cdots \times 10^0 \\
	\\
	fl(x) &= 0.33333 \times 10^0 \\
	fl(y) &= 0.71426 \times 10^0 \\
\end{align}
$$

Then, 
$$
fl(fl(x) + fl(y)) = fl(0.33333 + 0.71426) = fl(1.04762) = 0.10476 \times 10^1
$$

### Error

We just need to perform
$$
\biggr| \frac{\frac{22}{21} - 0.10476 \times 10^1}{\frac{22}{21}} \biggr|
$$

## Areas of Concern and Mitigation
1. Dividing by small numbers
2. Subtracting near equal numbers

Consider finding $\sqrt{9.01} - 3$ on a machine with 3 digit precision.

$$
\begin{align}
	\sqrt{9.01} &\to 0.3001662 \cdots \times 10^1 \\
	3 &\to 0.3000000\cdots \times 10^1 \\
	\\
	fl(\sqrt{9.01}) &= 0.300 \times 10^1 \\
	fl(3) &= 0.300 \times 10^1 \\
\end{align}
$$

Notice that their difference will be **0** which is not true. This is know as catastrophic failure. 

### Applying on Conjugate
$$
(\sqrt{9.01} - 3) \cdot \frac{\sqrt{9.01} + 3}{\sqrt{9.01} + 3} = \frac{9.01 - 9}{\sqrt{9.01} + 3} = \frac{0.1}{\sqrt{9.01} + 3} = \frac{0.01}{0.6}
$$

$$
\frac{1}{6} \cdot \frac{10^{-2}}{10^{-1}} = 0.166 \times 10^{-1}
$$

This result can be displayed on this 3 digit machine.

### Homework Additional Problem
> Consider $\frac{1 − \sec(x)}{\tan^2(x)}$, for which values of $x$ is there subtraction of nearly equal numbers? Find an alternate form that avoids the problem.

#### Answer
There is catastrophic cancellation when $\sec x \approx 1$. This occurs when $\frac{1}{\cos(x)} \approx 1$. Catastrophic cancellation will occur for near values in $\{n\pi \ |\ n\in\mathbb{Z} \}$.

Relevant equalities:
$$
\begin{align}
\frac{1}{\cos(x)} &= \sec{(x)} \\
\tan^2{x} + 1 &= \sec^2{x} \implies \sec^2{x} - 1 = \tan^2{x}
\end{align}
$$

**Work**:
$$
\begin{align}
\frac{1 − \sec(x)}{\tan^2(x)} = \frac{1 − \sec(x)}{\sec^2{x} - 1} &= -\frac{1 − \sec(x)}{1-\sec^2{x}} \\ \\
&= -\frac{1 − \sec(x)}{(1 − \sec(x))(1 + \sec(x))}
\\ \\
&= -\frac{1}{1 + \sec(x)}
\end{align}
$$

This solves the catastrophic cancellation issue by removing the subtraction in the numerator but does introduce another catastrophic cancellation in the denominator. 