# Lecture 09 20 22

Look at [[2.4 Error Analysis for Iterative Methods]] for more details on this limit. 

Consider the limit:
$$
\lim_{n\to\infty} \frac{|p_{n+1}-p|}{|p_n - p|^\alpha} = \lambda
$$

If $\lambda = 1, \alpha =1$ then the convergence is sub-linear. 

If we consider each part as an error part: 
$$
e_n = p_n - p
$$

We attain:

$$
\lim_{n\to\infty} \frac{|e_{n+1}|}{|e_n|^\alpha} = \lambda
$$

Thinking in terms of error makes the limit make more sense conceptually. 

## Convergence Rate Example

> Show that $\forall k\in\mathbb{Z}^+$, $\{\ p_n=\frac{1}{n^k}\ \}$ converges to zero and find at what rate. 

Since $k\gt0$, $\lim_{n\to\infty}\frac{1}{n^k} = 0$ 

**Finding Order ($\alpha$) of convergence**:

Firstly, see that $p=0$ (result of the above limit)

$$
\begin{align}
	\lim_{n\to\infty}\biggr|\frac{{\frac{1}{(n+1)^k}}-0}{{\frac{1}{n^k}}-0}\biggr| \to \lim_{n\to\infty} \biggr|\frac{n}{n+1}\biggr|^k = \boxed{1}
\end{align}
$$

> $\forall k, m$ find $N$ s.t $\frac{1}{N^k}\lt 10^{-m}$

$$
\begin{align}
	N^k &\gt 10^m \\
	k\log_{10}{N} &\gt m \\
	\log_{10}{N} &\gt \frac{m}{k} \\
	\\
	N &\gt 10^{\frac{m}{k}}
\end{align}
$$

## Convergence Rates of the Fixed Point Method
### Linear - Theorem 2.8
Requirements:
+ $g\in C[a, b]$ 
+ $g: [a, b]\to[a, b]$
+ $g'\in C[a, b]$
+ $|g'(x)|\leq k \in (0, 1)$
+ $g'(p) \neq 0$

### Quadratic - Theorem 2.9
Let $p$ be a solution to $x=g(x)$. Then suppose $g'(p)=0$ and $g'(p)$ is cts with $|g''(x)|\lt M$ on some open interval $I$ such that $p\in I$. Then $\exists\delta$ s.t $p_0\in[p -\delta, p+\delta]$ and the sequence converges to $p$ *at least* quadratically. Also for large $n$:
$$
|p_{n+1}-p| \lt \frac{M}{2}|p_n-p|^2
$$
 
## Newton's Method Review
If $f(p)=0$ and $f'(p)\neq0$, then for starting values $\approx p$, Newton's method converges quadratically. 

### Example
$$
\begin{align}
	f(x) &= x^2 \\
	f'(x) &= 2x
\end{align}
$$

Newtons method to find zeros:
$$
\begin{align}
	p_n &= p_{n-1} - \frac{f(p_{n-1})}{f'(p_{n-1})}\\ \\
		&= p_{n-1} - \frac{(p_{n-1})^2}{2\cdot p_{n-1}}\\ \\
		&= \frac{2p_{n-1}^2 - p_{n-1}^2}{2p_{n-1}} \\\\
	p_n	&= \frac{p_{n-1}}{2}
\end{align}
$$

Run algorithm:

| Iteration Index | $p_n$ | $e_n = \lvert p_n - p\rvert$ | $\frac{e_{n+1}}{e_n}$ |
| --------------- | ----- | ---------------------------- | --------------------- |
| 0               | 1     | $\lvert1-0\rvert$            | $-$                   | 
| 1               | 1/2   | $1/2$                        | $1/2$                 |
| 2               | 1/4   | $1/4$                        | $1/2$                 |
| 3               | 1/8   | $1/8$                        | $1/2$                 |
| $\vdots$        |       |                              |                       |

See that $\lambda = \frac{1}{2}, \alpha = 1$

See that it has a **linear** convergence. We know that newton's method converges linearly when $f(p) = 0$

## Multiple Roots
> Q: What happens when $f'(p)=0$
> A: Newton's method faces issues

A zero of $p$ of $f$ has a zero of multiplicity of $m$ if for $x\neq p$
$$
f(x) = (x-p)^m \cdot \underbrace{q(x)}_{\text{does not contribute to the zero at }x=p}
$$

where $\lim_{x\to p}q(x) \neq 0$

A simple zero is when $m=1$. 

### Zero Theorems
#### T2.11
$f\in C[a, b]$ has a simple zero in $(a, b)$ *iff* $f(p)=0$ but $f'(p)\neq0$

#### T2.12
$f\in C^m[a, b]$ has a zero with multiplicity $m$ at $p\in[a, b]$ *iff*
$$
f(p) = f'(p) = \dotso = f^{(m-1)}(p) = 0 \neq f^{(m)}(p) 
$$

Consider $f(x) = x^2$
$$
\begin{align}
	f'(0) &= 0 \\
	f''(0) &= 2
\end{align}
$$

This shows that $x=0$ is a zero with multiplicity 2.

## Newton's Method Conflict
Suppose $f$ is a function that has a zero at $x=p$ with a multiplicity $m$ where $m\gt1$

This means that **at least** $f'(p) = 0$. This means that for any $m\gt1$, Newton's Method will converge a less than quadratic rate. 

***Important***: For a simple zero, there exists an interval where any selected $p_0$ converges at a quadratic rate to $p$.

### *Workaround*

First define:
$$\mu(x) = \frac{f(x)}{f'(x)}$$

Since $p$ is a zero of $f$ with a zero multiplicity of $m$:
$$
\begin{align}
\mu(x) &= \frac{(x-p)^m\cdot q(x)}{m(x-p)^{m-1}q(x)+q'(x)(x-p)^m}
\\\\
&=(x-p)\frac{q(x)}{mq(x)+ (x-p)q'(x)}
\end{align}
$$

Then, 
$$
\mu(p) = \frac{q(p)}{mq(p) + (p-p)q'(p)} = \frac{1}{m} \gt 0
$$

However now, $p$ is a **simple zero** of $\mu(x)$

We can use Newtons method with $\mu(x)$ for quadratic convergence. 

$$
\begin{align}
	g(x) &= x - \frac{\mu(x)}{\mu'(x)} \\ \\
		 &= x - \frac{\mu(x)\mu'(x)}{[\mu'(x)]^2 - \mu(x)\mu''(x)}
\end{align}
$$

This form above is one of the countless alternate forms of Newton's method.