# 7.1 Norms Lecture 11 08 22 P2

We need norms to compare solutions to a system and vectors overall. 

## Properties of **Vector** Norms 

The $\| \cdot \|$ is a function.

$$
\| \cdot \| : \mathbb{R}^n \to \mathbb{R}
$$

### Properties
1. $\| \bar{x} \| \geq 0$ for any $\bar{x}$
2. $\| \bar{x} \| \iff \bar{x} = \vec{0}$
3. $\| \alpha\bar{x} \| = |\alpha|\| \bar{x} \|$
4. $\| \bar{x}+\bar{y} \| \leq \| \bar{x} \| + \| \bar{y} \|$

### Types of Norms

You can verify each of the norms below fit the properties of norms above.

#### Infinity Norm

$$
\| \bar{x} \|_\infty = \max_{1\leq i \leq n}\text{abs}(x_i)
$$

Just the biggest number in the vector after absolute value. 

#### $\ell_p$ Norm

$$
\| \bar{x} \|_p = \biggr( \sum_{i=0}^n x_i^2 \biggr)^\frac{1}{p} \text{ for } p \in {\mathbb{Z}}
$$

> Euclidean Norm is the $\ell_p$ norm where $p=2$ 

--- 

## Proving that $\ell_2$ is a Norm
1. Trivial
2. Trivial (Possible Proof by Contradiction)
3. Trivial (Use sum definition)
4. $\| \bar{x}+\bar{y} \| \leq \| \bar{x} \| + \| \bar{y} \|$

### Proving (4)

> TBA 

Proof will employ the Cauchy Schwarz IEQ. 

## Matrix Norms

Still $\|\cdot\|: \mathbb{R}^{n\times n} \to \mathbb{R}$

$\forall A, B \in \mathbb{R}^{n\times n}$ and $\alpha\in\mathbb{R}$

1. $\|A\|\geq0$
2. $\|A\| = 0 \iff A = 0$
3. $\| \alpha{A} \| = |\alpha|\| {A} \|$
4. $\| A+B \| \leq \| A \| + \| B \|$
5. $\| AB \| \leq \| A \| * \| B \|$

Norms with Matrices are associated with vectors.

## Natural Norms / Induced Norms

$$
\|A\| = \max_{\|\vec{x}\|=1}\|A\vec{x}\|
$$

Let $\vec{z}\in\mathbb{R}^n$ for $\vec{z}\neq0$ the $\vec{x}=\frac{\vec{z}}{\|\vec{z}\|}$ (*unit vector*)

Then:

$$
\|A\| = \max_{\|\vec{x}\|=1}\|A\vec{x}\| = \max_{\|\vec{x}\|=1}\biggr\|A\frac{\vec{z}}{\|\vec{z}\|}\biggr\| = \max_{\|\vec{z}\|\neq0}\frac{\|A\vec{z}\|}{\|\vec{z}\|}
$$

**Show that** $\forall \vec{z}\neq0,\, \|A\vec{z}\|\leq\|A\|\|\vec{z}\|$ 

Well trivially:

$$
\|A\vec{z}\|\leq\|A\|\|\vec{z}\| \to \|A\vec{z}\|\leq\max_{\|\vec{z}\|\neq0}\frac{\|A\vec{z}\|}{\|\vec{z}\|}\|\vec{z}\| = \max_{\|\vec{z}\|\neq0}{\|A\vec{z}\|}
$$

### $\infty$ Norm

$$
\begin{align}
\|A\|_\infty &= \max_{\vec{z} \neq 0}\frac{\|A\vec{z}\|_\infty}{\|\vec{z}\|_\infty} \\
&= \max_{1\leq i \leq n}\sum_{j=1}^n |a_{ij}|
\end{align}
$$

This is the max row sum. (for some reason)

## Error in Gaussian Elim (finite digit arithmetic)

Let $\tilde{x}$ be an approximation for $\bar{x}$ in $A\bar{x}=\bar{b}$ .

The backward error is defined by $\bar{r}=\bar{b}-A\tilde{x}$ while the forward error is $\|\tilde{x}-\bar{x}\|$ .

We might expect that if the forward error is small the backward error will be to. (**IT IS NOT**)

### Example
Consider system:

$$
\begin{bmatrix}
1 & 2 \\
1.0001 & 2
\end{bmatrix}
\begin{bmatrix}
x_1 \\
x_2
\end{bmatrix}
=
\begin{bmatrix}
3 \\
3.0001
\end{bmatrix}
$$

The solution is $[1, 1]^T$ however say an approximation returns with $[3, -0.0001]^T$

Then, $\bar{r} =\begin{bmatrix} 0.0002 \\ 0 \end{bmatrix}$ and $\|\bar{r}\|_\infty = 0.0002$

This is vastly different from

$$
\|\tilde{x}-\bar{x}\| = 
\begin{bmatrix}
-2 \\
1.0001
\end{bmatrix}
\to
\|\tilde{x}-\bar{x}\|_\infty = 2
$$